README.md, before:

# GPT-Image MCP Server

<img src="assets/dall-e-logo.png" alt="GPT-Image MCP Logo" width="256" height="256">

An MCP (Model Context Protocol) server for generating images using OpenAI's GPT-Image-1 API.

> **Note:** This is a fork of the original [DALL-E MCP Server](https://github.com/Garoth/dalle-mcp) by [Garoth](https://github.com/Garoth), refactored to exclusively support GPT-Image-1 and remove support for DALL-E 2 and DALL-E 3 models.

## Key Features

- Generate images from text descriptions using GPT-Image-1
- Edit existing images based on prompts using GPT-Image-1
- Generate images using existing images as input with GPT-Image-1
- Edit multiple images together with GPT-Image-1
- Customization options including size, quality, transparency, format

## Features

- Generate images using GPT-Image-1
- Edit existing images using GPT-Image-1
- Create variations of existing images using GPT-Image-1
- Image-to-image generation with GPT-Image-1
- Multi-image editing with GPT-Image-1
- Validate OpenAI API key

## Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/tymrtn/gpt-image-1-mcp.git
cd gpt-image-1-mcp

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Build the project
npm run build
```

> **Important:** The installation with `npm install` will automatically build the project. If you're cloning from GitHub, your directory structure may include additional subdirectories (like `github.com/tymrtn/` in the path). Make sure to use the correct full path when configuring the MCP server in your settings.

## Important Note for Cline Users

When using this GPT-Image MCP server with Cline, it's recommended to save generated images in your current workspace directory by setting the `saveDir` parameter to match your current working directory. This ensures Cline can properly locate and display the generated images in your conversation.

Example usage with Cline:
```json
{
  "prompt": "A tropical beach at sunset",
  "saveDir": "/path/to/current/workspace"
}
```


## Usage

### Running the Server

```bash
# Generate a test image in the `assets` directory
npm run generate-test-image
```

By default, this script saves images to the `assets` directory. When generating images in a different folder (e.g., `test`), ensure the directory exists or provide an absolute path via `--saveDir`. For example:

```bash
npm run generate-test-image -- --saveDir /full/path/to/project/test
```

### Configuration for Cline

Add the GPT-Image server to your Cline MCP settings file inside your editor's settings (locations vary by editor):

- VSCode: `~/.config/Code/User/globalStorage/saoudrizwan.claude-dev/settings/cline_mcp_settings.json`
- Cursor: `~/Library/Application Support/Cursor/User/globalStorage/saoudrizwan.claude-dev/settings/cline_mcp_settings.json` (macOS)
- Cursor: `%APPDATA%\Cursor\User\globalStorage\saoudrizwan.claude-dev\settings\cline_mcp_settings.json` (Windows)

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "github.com/tymrtn/gpt-image-1-mcp": {
      "command": "node",
      "args": ["/FULL/PATH/TO/gpt-image-1-mcp/build/index.js"],
      "env": {
        "OPENAI_API_KEY": "your-api-key-here",
        "SAVE_DIR": "/path/to/save/directory"
      },
      "disabled": false,
      "autoApprove": [
        "generate_image",
        "validate_key",
        "edit_image",
        "multi_image_edit"
      ],
      "transportType": "stdio"
    }
  }
}
```

Make sure to:
1. Replace `/FULL/PATH/TO/gpt-image-1-mcp/build/index.js` with the **exact** full path to the built index.js file
   - ⚠️ Verify this path carefully! If you cloned from GitHub or a fork, the path may include additional subdirectories
   - You can find the correct path by running `pwd` in your terminal when in the project directory, then append `/build/index.js`
2. Replace `your-api-key-here` with your OpenAI API key
3. Include `"transportType": "stdio"` as shown in the example

> **Troubleshooting Tip:** If you encounter a "MODULE_NOT_FOUND" error, verify that your path in the MCP settings exactly matches the location where you cloned and built the server.

### Available Tools

// Consistent saveDir description for README
const README_SAVE_DIR_DESC = "(optional): Directory to save images. Supports absolute paths (e.g., `/Users/me/images`) and paths relative to the server's Current Working Directory (CWD). Defaults to CWD if unspecified. **Important:** For consistent save locations (especially across different server start directories), use absolute paths.";

#### generate_image

Generate an image using GPT-Image-1 based on a text prompt.

```json
{
  "prompt": "A futuristic city with flying cars and neon lights",
  "size": "1024x1024",
  "quality": "high",
  "background": "auto",
  "moderation": "auto",
  "output_format": "png",
  "n": 1,
  "saveDir": "/path/to/save/directory",
  "fileName": "futuristic-city"
}
```

Parameters:
- `prompt` (required): Text description of the desired image
- `size` (optional): Size of the generated image: "1024x1024", "1792x1024", "1024x1792", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `quality` (optional): Quality of the generated image: "high", "medium", "low", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `background` (optional): Background transparency: "transparent", "opaque", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `moderation` (optional): Content moderation level: "low" or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `output_format` (optional): Format of the generated image: "png", "jpeg", or "webp" (default: "png")
- `output_compression` (optional): Compression level (0-100%) for webp/jpeg formats (default: 100)
- `n` (optional): Number of images to generate (1-10, default: 1)
- `saveDir` README_SAVE_DIR_DESC
- `fileName` (optional): Base filename for the generated images without extension (default: "gpt-image-{timestamp}")

#### edit_image

Edit an existing image using GPT-Image-1 based on a text prompt.

```json
{
  "prompt": "Add a red hat",
  "imagePath": "/path/to/image.png",
  "mask": "/path/to/mask.png",
  "size": "1024x1024",
  "quality": "high",
  "background": "auto",
  "moderation": "auto",
  "output_format": "png",
  "output_compression": 100,
  "n": 1,
  "saveDir": "/path/to/save/directory",
  "fileName": "edited-image"
}
```

Parameters:
- `prompt` (required): Text description of the desired edits
- `imagePath` (required): Path to the image to edit
- `mask` (optional): Path to a mask image where the white areas will be edited and black areas will be preserved
- `size` (optional): Size of the generated image: "1024x1024", "1792x1024", "1024x1792", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `quality` (optional): Quality of the generated image: "high", "medium", "low", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `background` (optional): Background transparency: "transparent", "opaque", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `moderation` (optional): Content moderation level: "low" or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `output_format` (optional): Format of the generated image: "png", "jpeg", or "webp" (default: "png")
- `output_compression` (optional): Compression level (0-100%) for webp/jpeg formats (default: 100)
- `n` (optional): Number of images to generate (1-10, default: 1)
- `saveDir` README_SAVE_DIR_DESC
- `fileName` (optional): Base filename for the edited images without extension (default: "gpt-image-edit-{timestamp}")

#### image_to_image

Generate an image using an existing image as input with GPT-Image-1.

```json
{
  "imagePath": "/path/to/image.png",
  "prompt": "Transform this into a watercolor painting",
  "size": "1024x1024",
  "quality": "high",
  "background": "auto",
  "moderation": "auto",
  "output_format": "png",
  "output_compression": 100,
  "n": 1,
  "saveDir": "/path/to/save/directory",
  "fileName": "transformed-image"
}
```

Parameters:
- `imagePath` (required): Path to the input image
- `prompt` (required): Text description to guide the generation
- `size` (optional): Size of the generated image: "1024x1024", "1792x1024", "1024x1792", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `quality` (optional): Quality of the generated image: "high", "medium", "low", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `background` (optional): Background transparency: "transparent", "opaque", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `moderation` (optional): Content moderation level: "low" or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `output_format` (optional): Format of the generated image: "png", "jpeg", or "webp" (default: "png")
- `output_compression` (optional): Compression level (0-100%) for webp/jpeg formats (default: 100)
- `n` (optional): Number of images to generate (1-10, default: 1)
- `saveDir` README_SAVE_DIR_DESC
- `fileName` (optional): Base filename for the generated images without extension (default: "gpt-img2img-{timestamp}")

#### multi_image_edit

Edit multiple images together using GPT-Image-1.

```json
{
  "prompt": "Combine these images into a cohesive scene",
  "imagePaths": ["/path/to/image1.png", "/path/to/image2.png"],
  "size": "1024x1024",
  "quality": "high",
  "background": "auto",
  "moderation": "auto",
  "output_format": "png",
  "output_compression": 100,
  "n": 1,
  "saveDir": "/path/to/save/directory",
  "fileName": "combined-image"
}
```

Parameters:
- `prompt` (required): Text description to guide the generation
- `imagePaths` (required): Array of paths to the input images
- `size` (optional): Size of the generated image: "1024x1024", "1792x1024", "1024x1792", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `quality` (optional): Quality of the generated image: "high", "medium", "low", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `background` (optional): Background transparency: "transparent", "opaque", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `moderation` (optional): Content moderation level: "low" or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `output_format` (optional): Format of the generated image: "png", "jpeg", or "webp" (default: "png")
- `output_compression` (optional): Compression level (0-100%) for webp/jpeg formats (default: 100)
- `n` (optional): Number of images to generate (1-10, default: 1)
- `saveDir` README_SAVE_DIR_DESC
- `fileName` (optional): Base filename for the generated images without extension (default: "image-edit-{timestamp}")

#### validate_api_key

Validate the OpenAI API key.

```json
{}
```

No parameters required.

## Development

## Testing Configuration

**Note: The following .env configuration is ONLY needed for running tests, not for normal operation.**

If you're developing or running tests for this project, create a `.env` file in the root directory with your OpenAI API key:

```
# Required for TESTS ONLY: OpenAI API Key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-api-key-here

# Optional: Default save directory for test images
# If not specified, images will be saved to the current directory
# SAVE_DIR=/path/to/save/directory
```

For normal operation with Cline, configure your API key in the MCP settings JSON as described in the "Adding to MCP Settings" section above.

You can get your API key from [OpenAI's API Keys page](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys).

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run basic tests
npm test

# Run all tests including edit and variation tests
npm run test:all

# Run tests in watch mode
npm run test:watch

# Run specific test by name
npm run test:name "should validate API key"
```

Note: Tests use real API calls and may incur charges on your OpenAI account.

### Generating Test Images

The project includes a script to generate test images for development and testing:

```bash
# Generate a test image in the assets directory
npm run generate-test-image
```

This will create a simple test image in the `assets` directory that can be used for testing the edit and variation features.

## License

MIT

## Acknowledgments

This project is a fork of the original [DALL-E MCP Server](https://github.com/Garoth/dalle-mcp) created by [Garoth](https://github.com/Garoth), modified to work exclusively with GPT-Image-1 model.

Commit message:

Update README.md to reflect changes in saveDir path requirements and supported image sizes for GPT-Image-1
- Changed example saveDir in README to emphasize the need for full absolute paths.
- Updated supported image sizes in the documentation to align with GPT-Image-1 specifications, replacing "1792x1024" with "1024x1536" and "1536x1024".
- Added a section on size normalization notes to clarify how unsupported sizes are handled by the server.

README.md, after:

# GPT-Image MCP Server

<img src="assets/dall-e-logo.png" alt="GPT-Image MCP Logo" width="256" height="256">

An MCP (Model Context Protocol) server for generating images using OpenAI's GPT-Image-1 API.

> **Note:** This is a fork of the original [DALL-E MCP Server](https://github.com/Garoth/dalle-mcp) by [Garoth](https://github.com/Garoth), refactored to exclusively support GPT-Image-1 and remove support for DALL-E 2 and DALL-E 3 models.

## Key Features

- Generate images from text descriptions using GPT-Image-1
- Edit existing images based on prompts using GPT-Image-1
- Generate images using existing images as input with GPT-Image-1
- Edit multiple images together with GPT-Image-1
- Customization options including size, quality, transparency, format

## Features

- Generate images using GPT-Image-1
- Edit existing images using GPT-Image-1
- Create variations of existing images using GPT-Image-1
- Image-to-image generation with GPT-Image-1
- Multi-image editing with GPT-Image-1
- Validate OpenAI API key

## Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/tymrtn/gpt-image-1-mcp.git
cd gpt-image-1-mcp

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Build the project
npm run build
```

> **Important:** The installation with `npm install` will automatically build the project. If you're cloning from GitHub, your directory structure may include additional subdirectories (like `github.com/tymrtn/` in the path). Make sure to use the correct full path when configuring the MCP server in your settings.

## Important Note for Cline Users

When using this GPT-Image MCP server with Cline, it's recommended to save generated images in your current workspace directory by setting the `saveDir` parameter to match your current working directory. This ensures Cline can properly locate and display the generated images in your conversation.

Example usage with Cline:
```json
{
  "prompt": "A tropical beach at sunset",
  "saveDir": "/full/path/to/current/workspace"
}
```


## Usage

### Running the Server

```bash
# Generate a test image in the `assets` directory
npm run generate-test-image
```

By default, this script saves images to the `assets` directory. When generating images in a different folder (e.g., `test`), ensure the directory exists or provide an absolute path via `--saveDir`. For example:

```bash
npm run generate-test-image -- --saveDir /full/path/to/project/test
```

### Configuration for Cline

Add the GPT-Image server to your Cline MCP settings file inside your editor's settings (locations vary by editor):

- VSCode: `~/.config/Code/User/globalStorage/saoudrizwan.claude-dev/settings/cline_mcp_settings.json`
- Cursor: `~/Library/Application Support/Cursor/User/globalStorage/saoudrizwan.claude-dev/settings/cline_mcp_settings.json` (macOS)
- Cursor: `%APPDATA%\Cursor\User\globalStorage\saoudrizwan.claude-dev\settings\cline_mcp_settings.json` (Windows)

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "github.com/tymrtn/gpt-image-1-mcp": {
      "command": "node",
      "args": ["/FULL/PATH/TO/gpt-image-1-mcp/build/index.js"],
      "env": {
        "OPENAI_API_KEY": "your-api-key-here",
        "SAVE_DIR": "/path/to/save/directory"
      },
      "disabled": false,
      "autoApprove": [
        "generate_image",
        "validate_key",
        "edit_image",
        "multi_image_edit"
      ],
      "transportType": "stdio"
    }
  }
}
```

Make sure to:
1. Replace `/FULL/PATH/TO/gpt-image-1-mcp/build/index.js` with the **exact** full path to the built index.js file
   - ⚠️ Verify this path carefully! If you cloned from GitHub or a fork, the path may include additional subdirectories
   - You can find the correct path by running `pwd` in your terminal when in the project directory, then append `/build/index.js`
2. Replace `your-api-key-here` with your OpenAI API key
3. Include `"transportType": "stdio"` as shown in the example

> **Troubleshooting Tip:** If you encounter a "MODULE_NOT_FOUND" error, verify that your path in the MCP settings exactly matches the location where you cloned and built the server.

### Available Tools

// Consistent saveDir description for README
const README_SAVE_DIR_DESC = "(optional): Directory to save images. Supports absolute paths (e.g., `/Users/me/images`) and paths relative to the server's Current Working Directory (CWD). Defaults to CWD if unspecified. **Important:** For consistent save locations (especially across different server start directories), use absolute paths.";

#### generate_image

Generate an image using GPT-Image-1 based on a text prompt.

```json
{
  "prompt": "A futuristic city with flying cars and neon lights",
  "size": "1024x1024",
  "quality": "high",
  "background": "auto",
  "moderation": "auto",
  "output_format": "png",
  "n": 1,
  "saveDir": "/path/to/save/directory",
  "fileName": "futuristic-city"
}
```

Parameters:
- `prompt` (required): Text description of the desired image
- `size` (optional): Size of the generated image: "1024x1024", "1024x1536", "1536x1024", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `quality` (optional): Quality of the generated image: "high", "medium", "low", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `background` (optional): Background transparency: "transparent", "opaque", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `moderation` (optional): Content moderation level: "low" or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `output_format` (optional): Format of the generated image: "png", "jpeg", or "webp" (default: "png")
- `output_compression` (optional): Compression level (0-100%) for webp/jpeg formats (default: 100)
- `n` (optional): Number of images to generate (1-10, default: 1)
- `saveDir` README_SAVE_DIR_DESC
- `fileName` (optional): Base filename for the generated images without extension (default: "gpt-image-{timestamp}")

#### edit_image

Edit an existing image using GPT-Image-1 based on a text prompt.

```json
{
  "prompt": "Add a red hat",
  "imagePath": "/path/to/image.png",
  "mask": "/path/to/mask.png",
  "size": "1024x1024",
  "quality": "high",
  "background": "auto",
  "moderation": "auto",
  "output_format": "png",
  "output_compression": 100,
  "n": 1,
  "saveDir": "/path/to/save/directory",
  "fileName": "edited-image"
}
```

Parameters:
- `prompt` (required): Text description of the desired edits
- `imagePath` (required): Path to the image to edit
- `mask` (optional): Path to a mask image where the white areas will be edited and black areas will be preserved
- `size` (optional): Size of the generated image: "1024x1024", "1024x1536", "1536x1024", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `quality` (optional): Quality of the generated image: "high", "medium", "low", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `background` (optional): Background transparency: "transparent", "opaque", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `moderation` (optional): Content moderation level: "low" or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `output_format` (optional): Format of the generated image: "png", "jpeg", or "webp" (default: "png")
- `output_compression` (optional): Compression level (0-100%) for webp/jpeg formats (default: 100)
- `n` (optional): Number of images to generate (1-10, default: 1)
- `saveDir` README_SAVE_DIR_DESC
- `fileName` (optional): Base filename for the edited images without extension (default: "gpt-image-edit-{timestamp}")

#### image_to_image

Generate an image using an existing image as input with GPT-Image-1.

```json
{
  "imagePath": "/path/to/image.png",
  "prompt": "Transform this into a watercolor painting",
  "size": "1024x1024",
  "quality": "high",
  "background": "auto",
  "moderation": "auto",
  "output_format": "png",
  "output_compression": 100,
  "n": 1,
  "saveDir": "/path/to/save/directory",
  "fileName": "transformed-image"
}
```

Parameters:
- `imagePath` (required): Path to the input image
- `prompt` (required): Text description to guide the generation
- `size` (optional): Size of the generated image: "1024x1024", "1024x1536", "1536x1024", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `quality` (optional): Quality of the generated image: "high", "medium", "low", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `background` (optional): Background transparency: "transparent", "opaque", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `moderation` (optional): Content moderation level: "low" or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `output_format` (optional): Format of the generated image: "png", "jpeg", or "webp" (default: "png")
- `output_compression` (optional): Compression level (0-100%) for webp/jpeg formats (default: 100)
- `n` (optional): Number of images to generate (1-10, default: 1)
- `saveDir` README_SAVE_DIR_DESC
- `fileName` (optional): Base filename for the generated images without extension (default: "gpt-img2img-{timestamp}")

#### multi_image_edit

Edit multiple images together using GPT-Image-1.

```json
{
  "prompt": "Combine these images into a cohesive scene",
  "imagePaths": ["/path/to/image1.png", "/path/to/image2.png"],
  "size": "1024x1024",
  "quality": "high",
  "background": "auto",
  "moderation": "auto",
  "output_format": "png",
  "output_compression": 100,
  "n": 1,
  "saveDir": "/path/to/save/directory",
  "fileName": "combined-image"
}
```

Parameters:
- `prompt` (required): Text description to guide the generation
- `imagePaths` (required): Array of paths to the input images
- `size` (optional): Size of the generated image: "1024x1024", "1024x1536", "1536x1024", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `quality` (optional): Quality of the generated image: "high", "medium", "low", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `background` (optional): Background transparency: "transparent", "opaque", or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `moderation` (optional): Content moderation level: "low" or "auto" (default: "auto")
- `output_format` (optional): Format of the generated image: "png", "jpeg", or "webp" (default: "png")
- `output_compression` (optional): Compression level (0-100%) for webp/jpeg formats (default: 100)
- `n` (optional): Number of images to generate (1-10, default: 1)
- `saveDir` README_SAVE_DIR_DESC
- `fileName` (optional): Base filename for the generated images without extension (default: "image-edit-{timestamp}")

#### validate_api_key

Validate the OpenAI API key.

```json
{}
```

No parameters required.

## Development

## Testing Configuration

**Note: The following .env configuration is ONLY needed for running tests, not for normal operation.**

If you're developing or running tests for this project, create a `.env` file in the root directory with your OpenAI API key:

```
# Required for TESTS ONLY: OpenAI API Key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-api-key-here

# Optional: Default save directory for test images
# If not specified, images will be saved to the current directory
# SAVE_DIR=/path/to/save/directory
```

For normal operation with Cline, configure your API key in the MCP settings JSON as described in the "Adding to MCP Settings" section above.

You can get your API key from [OpenAI's API Keys page](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys).

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run basic tests
npm test

# Run all tests including edit and variation tests
npm run test:all

# Run tests in watch mode
npm run test:watch

# Run specific test by name
npm run test:name "should validate API key"
```

Note: Tests use real API calls and may incur charges on your OpenAI account.

### Generating Test Images

The project includes a script to generate test images for development and testing:

```bash
# Generate a test image in the assets directory
npm run generate-test-image
```

This will create a simple test image in the `assets` directory that can be used for testing the edit and variation features.

## License

MIT

## Acknowledgments

This project is a fork of the original [DALL-E MCP Server](https://github.com/Garoth/dalle-mcp) created by [Garoth](https://github.com/Garoth), modified to work exclusively with GPT-Image-1 model.

#### Size Normalization Notes

- **Supported sizes:**
  - `1024x1024`
  - `1024x1536`
  - `1536x1024`
- If you request a size that is not supported, the server will automatically select the closest supported size. The selection prioritizes aspect ratio similarity, then area difference.
- If the size string is not in the format `WIDTHxHEIGHT` (e.g., `"foo"`), the server will default to `auto`.
- See `src/utils/params.ts` for the normalization logic. This ensures compatibility with the GPT-Image-1 API and helps avoid errors from unsupported size requests.
